We're going to use matplotlib
within the Jupyter Notebook,
just like with did with pandas.
Jupyter has some specialized support for
matplotlib and
this is enabled by using the IPython
magic %matplotlib notebook.
Remember that in the Jupyter Notebook, the
IPython magics are just helper functions
which set up the environment so that
the web based rendering can be enabled.
matplotlib itself can work well
outside of the Jupyter environment.
But for this course, we're going to focus
on its use within the web environment in
part because of how popular Jupyter
has become in data science practice.
So what actually has happened when you
run the magic function matplotlib with
the inline parameter, is that matplotlib
is configured to render into the browser.
This configuration is called a backend,
and
matplotlib has a number of
different backends available.
A backend is an abstraction layer
which knows how to interact with
the operating environment,
whether it's an operating system, or
an environment like the browser, and
knows how to render matplotlib commands.
In fact, there's a number of
different interactive backends, but
there are also backends called hard copy
backends, which support rendering to
graphics formats, like scalable
vector graphics, SVGs, or PNGs.
So not all backends support all features,
especially interactive features,
which we'll touch on later in this course.
Let's import the matplotlib library,
which we'll do as mpl, and
call get backend to make sure
we're using the NbAgg backend.
Great, you'll notice that matplotlib has
a lot of non-Pythonic naming conventions.
In particular, you'll be accessing
variables using the Get and Set.
Which is an accessor pattern which is
more common in languages like Java.
This is just something you have to get
used to, but remember you can hit Tab for
type hint autocompletion
in the Jupyter Notebook.
So this can help you find
the functions that you're looking for.
Now we're not going to spend much
time with the backend layer, but
it's important to be aware of.
If you're on Mac OS, for instance,
your default backend when using
matplotlib is one system.
While on Linux, GTK is my default backend.
The next layer is where we'll
spend most of our time though, and
that's called the artist layer.
The artist layer is an abstraction
around drawing and layout primitives.
The root of visuals is a set of containers
which includes a figure object with one or
more subplots,
each with a series of one or more axes.
This last object, the axes is the most
common one you'll interact with,
changing the range of a given axis or
plotting shapes to it.
And just a brief aside, especially since
this is a global classroom with people
from around the world enrolled where
English might not be their first language,
matplotlib relies heavily on the axes
object, which is the plural form of axis.
But matplotlib also has
an axis object as well.
And an axes is actually made
up of two axis objects.
One for the x, horizontal dimension.
And one for the y, or vertical dimension.
So you might hear me pronouncing
these two words, axes and
axis a bit more intentionally
than I would in regular speech
in order to help make
things easier to follow.
The artist layer also contains
primitives and collections.
These are base drawing items, things
like a rectangle, ellipse or a line.
And collections of items,
such as a path, which might capture many
lines together into a polygon shape.
Collections are easy to recognize as their
name tends to end in the word collection.
It's worth taking a moment to look at
the kinds of artists which are available.
Here's an image from the matplotlib
documentation on artists.
You'll see that there's lots of
child objects of the artists object,
and that one of them is
called patches.patch.
This name comes from the matlab
roots of the project.
And a patch is any two-dimensional object
which has a face color and an edge color.
And children of the patch class
are the primitives, as we've discussed.
Okay, so matplotlib has two layers.
A backend layer, which knows about low
level graphics routines it can render to
the screen or to a file.
We'll use the inline backend for
most of our work.
And the artist layer, which describes
primitives, collections, and containers.
It knows how figures
are composed of subfigures and
where objects are in a given
axes coordinate system.
So with this, we can actually get started
building figures and rendering them.
But there's one more layer which
is extremely important for
us as data scientists in particular,
and this is called the scripting layer.
You see, if we were writing
an application to use matplotlib,
we might never care about
the scripting layer.
But this layer helps simplify and speed
up our interaction with the environment
in order to build plots quickly.
It does this, frankly,
by doing a bunch of magic for us.
And the difference between someone
who is effective with matplotlib and
someone who isn't,
is usually based on their understanding
of this magic of the scripting layer.
The scripting layer we use in
this course is called pyplot.
So that describes
the matplotlib layer cake.
There's a backend,
which deals with actual drawing.
A bunch of artists on top of the backend,
which describe how data is arranged.
And a scripting layer,
which actually creates those artists and
choreographs them all together.
I just want to address one
more topic before we move on,
and that's the difference
between procedural and
declarative visualization libraries and,
well, user interfaces more generally.
The pyplot scripting layer is a procedural
method for building a visualization,
in that we tell the underlying software
which drawing actions we want it to take
in order to render our data.
There are also declarative methods for
visualizing data.
HTML is a great example of this.
Instead of issuing command after
command to the backend rendering agent,
which is the browser with HTML,
HTML documents are formatted as models
of relationships in a document, often
called the DOM, or Document Object Model.
These are two fundamentally
different ways of creating and
representing graphical interfaces.
The popular JavaScript library,
for instance,
D3.JS is an example of a declarative
information visualization method.
While matplotlib's pyplot is
an example of a procedural
information visualization method.
In the next lecture, we're going to get
dirty and start making some graphs.
But before we do that, I wanted you to
check out an article by John Hunter and
Michael Droettboom.
While now a bit dated, this article was
published in the second volume of the book
Architecture of Open Source Applications,
and provides a little more context for
the architecture of matplotlib.